♪ ♪
Previously on Star Trek:
Strange New Worlds...
I saw my own death. Spock.
I know exactly how
and when my life ends.
CHAPEL: The Gorn will hatch from
her body in less than a day.
SPOCK: The incubation has
severely altered her biochemistry.
GAMBLE: With Spock's brain.
M'Benga's research. and
Chapel's genetic expertise.
-(screeching)
-(Spock and Batel screaming)
-(Chapel grunts)
-BATEL: I saw something.
SPOCK: Yes.
It felt both a part
of you and not.
M'BENGA: Nurse
Chapel and Dr. Korby
are about to make history.
The landing party's
meeting soon.
-On Vadia Nine?
-You've earned it.
CHAPEL: Let's go
dig up the past.
KORBY: There is indeed some form
of advanced technology
hiding beneath us.
CHAPEL: Wow.
PELIA: There is evil
in this universe.
-CHAPEL: Gamble!
-(screams)
He wasn't ready
for away missions.
You know more than most.
we can't protect everyone.
-(gasps)
-(bones snap)
KORBY: Spock found life-forms
trapped inside orbs.
UHURA: Unwelcome guests.
LA'AN: "Here stands
the Beholder. sentry
of eternal bridges."
CHAPEL: This thing has
a life sign reading.
LA'AN: What if this place
isn't a palace or a lab?
What if it's a prison?
(speaking alien language)
Captain?
BATEL: I don't know
what happened in there.
(grunting)
I had this overwhelming desire
to kill.
Whatever it is.
we'll figure it out.
You couldn't kill your
favorite ensign now. could you?
-(grunts)
-No!
(guttural sigh)
PELIA: If any of those
things ever escaped.
God help us all.
PIKE: Captain's personal
log. Stardate 3165.2.
After exhaustive evaluation.
Captain Batel has been cleared
to return to active
duty as the new director
of the Starfleet Judge
Advocate General's Office.
While we knew she couldn't
stay on Enterprise forever.
it doesn't make saying
goodbye any easier.
-Welcome back.
-(sighs)
-How did it feel?
-Amazing but tiring.
I'm exhausted from all
the bureaucratic banter.
Mm. They're really putting
you through the wringer. huh?
The meetings are endless.
Tell me. when did Starfleet
start cloning officials?
What can I do to help?
Take me to your cabin.
where we can disappear.
just you and me. for
the next 72 hours.
Mm.
What?
What did you do?
UNA: It sure won't be the
same here without you. Marie.
You were only gone a week.
and Chris hardly knew
what to do with himself.
He actually jumped back into
test pilot drills. voluntarily.
I heard him mutter something
about yoga the other day?
Okay. all right.
laugh all you want.
but yoga will take
down the best of men.
But truly. you seem well.
I am. Thanks to all of you.
(door chimes)
You... Oh. wow.
So. uh. first Captain's Table?
-Well. how did you...?
-PELIA: Looking sharp.
Mr. Scott.
(laughter)
I thought you said this
was a formal affair.
It is. it is.
-For you.
-(chuckles)
Oh...
(laughter)
BATEL: I'm just glad Enterprise
was able to be my
ride back to Earth.
And I'm glad we
all get to be there
-for your promotion ceremony.
-Cheers.
Additionally. we will
take the opportunity
to run ship-wide diagnostics.
Enterprise has had a
challenging few months.
That is an understatement.
PELIA: Oh. challenging
schmallenging.
Remind me to tell
you about the time
I spent with a time-tra...
traveling doctor I once knew.
CHAPEL: Uh. Captain. it's. it's
wonderful to see you again.
but I've got an
incoming communication
that should be landing
any moment. so...
-How is Dr. Korby these days?
-LA'AN: Far.
He's on an expedition
in the Ba-Dates system.
Cali-Katchna.
I'm sorry. what did you say?
SPOCK: The phrase
the Vezda spoke
to you... "Cali-Katchna."
CHAPEL: Yeah. it turns out
it's phonetically
almost identical
to the name of the city on
Skygowan. where Roger is.
Followed a lead there. he's
been ingratiating himself
with a local high cleric.
SPOCK: Do you think
that is a coincidence?
(sighs) I don't remember
hearing it at all.
Uh. in any case.
I hope Roger finds what
he's looking for soon.
I know how hard long
distance can be.
It is. but it can be done.
(chuckles softly)
♪ ♪
KORBY: I wish you could
see this place. Christine.
A beautiful city. full of life.
And a whole culture
built on the belief
that the Vezda were
gods. If only they knew.
Their spiritual high chambers
float above the city.
From the guarded entrance.
you transport up to
the higher level.
It's taken me weeks
to build their trust.
But today the local
high cleric Zeperez
has agreed to take me up.
Hopefully. he can
help us understand
what we encountered
on Vadia Nine.
Maybe even clues about the
Vezda's so-called immortality.
SCOTTY: We'll have to shut down
the medical transporter
before the diagnostics sweep.
Buffer and all.
We just did a purge a
few months after that...
Well. as Pelia would say.
"We sent that Vezda
demon back to hell."
CHAPEL: Would Pelia ever
say that like a vampire?
Well. she would sometimes.
(PADD beeps)
Odd.
-What?
-Uh...
Residual pattern
geometries. wee bitty ones.
Hardly there at all.
but there they are.
Check the logs.
ABNA: Zeperez is promised to us.
He has come to deliver
us to the gods.
Could someone have used
the medical transporter
without you knowing?
-(beeps negatively)
-Access is DNA-locked.
Guys. there's a pattern
here. it's... it's human.
It's been broken in pieces.
SCOTTY: Aye. seems to have been
rebuilt from emergency backups.
Let's see if we can get
the pieces to cohere.
-Oh. my...
-M'BENGA: Scotty?
Whose pattern was rebuilt?
SCOTTY: Ensign Gamble's pattern.
And it's left the ship.
But where did it go?
If it isn't Dr. Korby.
The man who wants
to live forever.
Well. you've come
to the right place.
PIKE: Space.
The final frontier.
These are the voyages of
the starship Enterprise.
Its five-year mission:
to explore strange new worlds...
...to seek out new life
and new civilizations...
...to boldly go where
no one has gone before.
♪
♪ ♪
All signs points to the Vezda
having rebuilt Gamble's body
and enabled the
transporter from inside.
Is that even possible?
I would have said no. until now.
Where did he go?
CHAPEL: Roger's emergency
transponder activated 12 hours ago.
He hasn't answered
any messages since.
It's too many coincidences.
Even at full warp.
it'll take us 11 hours.
SPOCK: Skygowan is not
a warp-capable society.
But they do engage
in interstellar trade
with the Orions.
It's a mix of locals
and travelers.
most hostile to the Federation.
All right. Understood.
We'll notify Starfleet
and then you and La'An
will lead a covert
tactical landing party.
Get in. find Korby. assess
the Vezda situation.
Do not engage until
we have backup.
a plan or. God willing. both.
Joseph...
I'll go. too.
I was gonna say you don't
have to be on this mission.
No. I have to do it.
Spock. I want Science
and Engineering
on a deep dive into every
piece of data we have
from the Vadia Nine expedition.
If one of these things is loose.
we need to find a
way to contain it.
All right. let's get to it.
♪ ♪
Tai chi not cutting
it for you today?
-(chuckles softly)
-You know.
you didn't have to
come on this mission.
You have a new job
to report for. so...
We'll be back in time.
It doesn't make sense but I...
I think I need to be here.
The way you reacted
to the Vezda.
Like I had to stop it.
We have to. Chris.
Why?
What do you know
about it. Marie?
What-What's your
gut telling you?
I don't know.
I just know we
can't let it escape.
We won't.
I keep feeling like there's
this rope around my waist.
pulling me towards something
I don't understand.
Destiny maybe.
Do you really still believe our
futures are written in stone?
These last few years have...
well. they've changed
what I thought life
could be. I don't know.
Maybe there is more
possibility than I thought.
Hmm.
Who told you that?
A wise woman.
(chuckles softly)
Right before she told
me to shave my beard.
It was just so scratchy.
(indistinct chatter)
CHAPEL: They're so much
like Vadia Nine here.
I can see why Roger
was drawn to it.
UHURA: Korby's
communicator isn't pinging.
but that's where
it went offline.
CHAPEL: That looks just like
the gateway on Vadia Nine.
It must act as a transport
to the upper chamber.
Two guards. lightly armed.
I just need a distraction.
-Joseph. what about...
-Like on Rigel?
(both cackling)
-Hey.
-I told you!
They'll never let us.
(chatter. laughter)
-Excuse me. sir? Sir?
-(laughing)
Sir? Uh-oh.
Vulcan nerve pinch?
-Yeah.
-CHAPEL: Oh. my God.
-That's what you guys do?
-You're jealous. right?
You couldn't learn it?
It wasn't for lack of trying.
Can-can you show me
your thumb placement?
Ladies?
If we're going to find Korby.
we've got to get
through that gateway.
UHURA: Just pointing out.
the last time we walked
into something like that.
we almost got
trapped for eternity.
♪ ♪
At least this one doesn't
have a blood lock.
like on Vadia Nine.
(whooshing)
Okay. so the Vezda escaped
the transporter buffer.
But how did it get halfway
across the quadrant?
Our experiences on Vadia
Nine revealed technologies
that exploit
inter-dimensional space.
They may also travel
via similar methods.
I'm picking up what you're
laying down. Spock-O.
This was our location
when Gamble's
pattern was rebuilt.
We know inter-dimensional
space folds along those...
-uh. what do you call them?
-Ley lines.
They're a real thing.
SPOCK: Five days ago. at the
moment the Vezda escaped.
it appears Enterprise was
on one of those ley lines.
SAM: One that leads
directly to Skygowan.
Yeah. What if these lines
are a kind of bus route
for inter-dimensional
travel? You know.
without actual buses. of course.
All great civilizations maintain
some sort of trade route.
a way to connect the far
reaches of the empire.
Oh. look. there's one that
connects Vadia Nine to Skygowan.
Oh. dear.
If that thing in
Gamble's body can travel
your bus-less bus route and
access that Vezda prison
from across deep
space. then. th...
Then it could feasibly free
all its incarcerated brethren
and unleash them on Skygowan.
PELIA: The sky
would rain demons.
demons that could
kill and possess
every man. woman and
child on the planet.
♪
KORBY: No. No. no. no.
You shouldn't have come.
Gamble's been taken
over by the Vezda.
-We know.
-No. you don't understand.
Some of the people
on this planet.
they-they-they worship
him like. like he's a god.
If he commands
it. they'll do it.
Anything.
♪ ♪
(excited chatter)
Friends.
We are in the final days.
Prepare yourselves
for liberation.
Demittis tenebris.
Interitus vide Clara.
(pained groaning)
(screaming)
Captain Pike. I
hear you might have
a planet in need of assistance.
Good to see you. James.
If we can't contain this.
I'm worried it might
become a galactic threat.
Well. Farragut is fully repaired
and we are on our
way to you now.
Starfleet's orders are to
observe and not interfere.
Might not be that simple.
I'm gonna need to know your
captain's position on that.
My captain's position is that
Enterprise saved her life.
And she owes you one.
It's not very Vulcan of her.
but she's learning.
No offense. Spock.
None taken.
Thank you. James. Pike out.
SCOTTY: I'd just like to know.
sir. so we can better help out.
whatever the plan is gonna be.
Rescue the people. stop
the Vezda. kill it.
Any one of those would
do. I just need options.
Demittis tenebris...
UNA: Okay. Gamble is
taking over the city below.
How do we stop him?
If we could get our hands
on one of those orbs.
LA'AN: The kind that Gamble
was trapped in before?
Currently. they're
the only thing we know
will actually stop the Vezda.
Roger? Something to tell us?
I think there might be more
of those orbs through here.
I think this symbol
is associated
with the containment orbs.
Well. it was on the
well on Vadia Nine.
The entity inside Gamble
tried to get through here.
The glyphs changed. but then
nothing else happened.
Wherever it was trying
to go. it failed.
The idea that good
and evil exist.
have always existed.
is the most commonly
shared belief
in all the galaxy.
Wow.
That verse is in Swahili.
Your first language?
M'BENGA: It was also mine.
"A young boy was not yet a man.
"but his time had come.
"To kill or be killed.
A knife in his hands."
Another myth? An epic poem?
M'BENGA: No.
It's about me.
I was attacked on a
colony when I was 12.
Had to defend myself.
The first time I. uh...
I took a life.
Joseph...
how is your life
story written here.
light-years from
where you were born?
Do you believe in destiny?
I delivered the
boy to the creature
that took his body.
Maybe I'm supposed to be here.
I don't like any of this.
We need to find a way to
get back to Enterprise.
UNA: Joseph!
We don't need to risk all of us.
I can find one of the orbs.
No.
That's an order. Doctor.
(all grunting)
You were close.
About the entryway.
It's not just about you.
It's about us.
It's about duality.
Everything here is.
The Beholders
constructed this portal
so that it could not
be traversed alone.
Two must pass through.
You wanted the
Enterprise to come.
You needed me there so you
could get back to Vadia Nine
and this prison. dozens
of light-years away.
I retain Gamble's
memories. Doctor.
You became a part of him.
and so. a part of me.
And that is how we
opened this doorway
and released my
people to Skygowan.
where their future
bodies await us.
So...
...thank you.
This warden has stood
over us for eternity.
Now. the Beholder dies.
and what keeps us
from escaping ends.
(screams)
(groaning)
(panting)
♪ ♪
You couldn't go after him?
There was no way to
get through the door.
After the Vezda pulled
M'Benga through.
it sealed closed.
Our only option was to
return to Enterprise
and find another way
in. any other way.
I think Gamble needed to
go through with M'Benga.
Otherwise. I'm sure the
Vezda would have taken
the time to kill us.
M'Benga hasn't
responded to comms
and Uhura still can't locate
his transponder signal.
It's like they just disappeared.
They have to be somewhere.
It's just a matter of
tracking them down.
CHAPEL (over comm):
Captain Pike?
You'd better get to sickbay.
It's. uh. it's Captain Batel.
CHAPEL: This is
incredible. Her eyes.
-BATEL: They've changed?
-CHAPEL: Yes.
I think I've seen this before.
In a pictograph.
On an altar.
Are you sure you feel okay?
Honestly. I feel fine.
Uh. more than fine.
I feel great.
Everything looks normal to
me if that helps at all.
Not really. no.
I think they may be fading back.
-CHAPEL: Wait.
-PIKE: What?
CHAPEL: No way.
No. this is impossible.
-PIKE: What?
-Oh. come on.
Nurse Chapel?
Sorry. Sorry.
Look.
This is the result of
the bio-scan we took
of the Beholder
statue on Vadia Nine.
(chuckles) We didn't think
to cross-reference it.
Because why would we?
-Christine. this is not the time.
-Look at this.
These are Captain
Batel's life signs.
Right now.
What. you're saying Marie
is somehow connected
to the Beholder
statue on Vadia Nine?
No.
According to this...
...she is the statue.
The statue is her.
GAMBLE: The Beholder.
These things don't die
easy. but when they do.
they die screaming.
I'm still alive.
You haven't killed me.
You didn't just
need me to get in.
You need me to get
out. too. don't you?
If I die...
...would you be stuck here?
Oh. you will die.
Not until I permit it.
Don't be too sure.
-(grunts)
-(screeching)
(screeching echoes)
It doesn't make any sense.
Maybe it does.
Maybe it finally makes all
the sense in the world.
The Gorn. Una's Illyrian blood.
the Chimera Blossom.
You all saved me. but
you also changed me.
Okay.
The Vezda.
What if they are evil?
-Many races are capable of...
-I mean.
what if they are the evil
that predates doing evil?
What if they are evil itself?
I am not sure I understand.
CHAPEL: Almost every
race claims to have had
encounters. battles with evil.
Definitely. I've seen this
all over the galaxy...
And when we fight things.
when we beat back the
forces threatening us.
we have an epigenetic response.
The way humans can
sense animal predators.
And Vulcans can feel the
coming of an earthquake.
CHAPEL: Our biology
changes in response to
the threats we encounter.
What if by hybridizing me.
I have somehow taken
on all the adaptive
characteristics of races
that have faced evil.
The Gorn. humans. Illyrians.
If the Vezda are an evil that
predates all our known races.
it is possible that all
races that came later
might hold some genetic
memory of how to combat them.
What if I got all of them?
All the parts of every race
that know how to fight
the Vezda are in me.
And maybe by them coming
together in one body it's...
...it's transforming me.
Into what?
Some kind of protector.
The Vezda are very
old and very powerful.
But something locked
them down in that well
on Vadia Nine and
threw away the key.
Something equally
powerful. maybe more.
And then stood
sentry for millennia.
waiting for a day when
they might escape.
A warden of sorts.
What if it's me?
Not you. it-it...
them eons ago. not you now.
How ca...? How can
that even be possible?
SPOCK: Captain. when dealing
with inter-dimensional space.
cause and effect
can be reversed.
And time is not what
it seems to be to us.
Chris?
Why haven't I been
able to settle?
We both know the feelings
I've been having like some
puzzle piece that just
won't fit. that...
that I can't find some purpose.
that it's eluding me.
A starship captain.
Counselor General.
None of them fit anymore.
(sighs)
But this does.
No. this is...
Marie.
The Beholder's bio
signature is mine.
Because I am the sentry.
I have always been.
Effect before cause. remember?
Everything that happened to me
was so I could do this.
So I could be this.
So I could stand where
I have always stood.
It's my destiny.
You. of all people.
can understand that.
Marie. if...
if what you're saying is true...
I stay.
I guard.
I never leave.
You will have to
defeat him first.
CHAPEL: The way you reacted
to him the first time.
it...
it triggered your capabilities.
Proximity could cause
it to happen again.
There's only one
way to find out.
Then I'm coming with you.
♪ ♪
PIKE: Seems like things have
calmed down on the surface.
BATEL: Until Gamble
shows up again.
♪ ♪
Chris...
this portal must only
be programmed to open
for Joseph and Gamble together.
Without them. it's not working.
Joseph's trapped inside there.
What do you need to open it?
To force it?
Far more power than
either of us have.
The energy of a
Vezda. I'm not sure.
Okay. you're talking about
a science so advanced
it might as well be magic.
So what do we have
that could open it?
We have to get power to
Captains Batel and Pike.
They're on the second
level of the temple.
They need it to open the portal.
SCOTTY: We can beam
down a nuclear battery.
The power needed suggests a
battery will not be enough.
Two batteries?
At the necessary valences.
thermal. chemical. radiant.
gravitational.
electrical. or nuclear
may likely prove
far too destructive.
Hmm. exactly how much
power do you need?
Based on the data of
the Vezda life-form.
approximately 3.22 times
ten to the 26 watts.
Hmm. that is the power
of the Earth's sun.
Less. technically.
The sun is...
close enough.
A focused phaser blast
from a starship could get you
about half of that?
SCOTTY: Aye. but you'd
have to direct it
precisely into the
system or you'll
vaporize the whole temple.
You said a starship could
generate half of what we need?
-Mm-hmm.
-What about two star ships?
-Phasers are not additive.
-SCOTTY: Well. no. they're not.
but they are complementary.
Fascinating.
Scotty is right.
Simultaneous fire from two ships
might do the trick.
Okay. sounds like a plan.
No. you don't understand.
Ship safeguards
won't let us link
our weapons systems
to the Farragut's.
We'd need the two ships to fire
in perfect synchronicity.
A millisecond off.
and the whole temple
down there goes boom.
And we'd need to
fire them manually.
I have an idea.
Two ships firing energy
at the same time.
at the same target?
Phaser streams of
anti-protons. to be precise.
Those are very powerful.
Perhaps the only thing powerful
enough to help Captain Batel
and Captain Pike open the door.
But... two ships?
Yeah. and they have
to operate in tandem.
Enterprise and Farragut seem
like they're not
moving. but they are...
radiation waves. cosmic gas.
solar flares... there's
a lot going through here.
And I'm telling you as a pilot.
they shake at all.
the beams separate and
it's adios Skygowans.
So how do we do this and not...
destroy the planet?
Two pilots must
operate together.
Okay.
What do you know of
the Vulcan mind meld?
(laughs)
I mean. frankly. about
as much as I want to.
I'm not big on intimacy
without someone knowing every
single one of my thoughts.
Wait. that wasn't just
intellectual curiosity. was it?
No. it was not.
Hold on. you have a
great pilot right here.
It's not really fancy
flying that's called for.
SPOCK: No.
The firing process
is rudimentary.
It is the coordination
that is necessary.
Two people must
quickly be comfortable
sharing a consciousness.
I have learned.
despite your reticence.
that you are willing to
do things others are not.
You seem to
understand me. Spock.
Are you willing to attempt this?
If the Vezda cannot be stopped.
more than a single
world may fall.
Well. I see why you
brought me to a bar.
This is one hell of a date.
Indeed.
Okay. Mr. Spock.
But be gentle.
Oh. wait.
wait. wait. Um...
(clears throat)
That one time on
Orion's second moon.
Just try not to judge. okay?
I will do my best. Commander.
Maybe call me Jim.
Yes. Jim.
SPOCK: My mind to your mind.
My thoughts to your thoughts.
-Weapons ready?
-LA'AN: Aye.
-Engineering?
-As ready as we'll ever be.
Lieutenant Spock?
SPOCK and KIRK:
We are both ready.
That's eerie.
They're connecting even
faster than a comms link.
Get used to it. Ensign.
As Lieutenant
Ortegas likes to say.
"Let's light this candle."
SPOCK and KIRK: One
quarter impulse power.
PELIA: Oh.
They move in perfect
synchronicity.
It's almost poetic.
Steady. Pelia.
I'm steady. I'm steady.
SPOCK and KIRK:
Rotation. 43 degrees
toward the planet's surface.
How's our aim?
-On target.
-Hold ships.
SPOCK and KIRK: Rotation locked.
Fire.
♪ ♪
You ready?
(screeching)
PIKE: We're on Vadia Nine.
(screeching continues)
We are.
-Joseph. How...?
-No time.
Hurry. It's trying to break out.
Annoying.
You... and a pet.
For eons. my people
have suffered
under your wretched eyes.
The indignities I have imagined
committing upon
you. The suffering.
(gasps)
Human flesh.
So fragile.
-Stop it.
-You.
-A fly.
-(cries out)
Chris. don't do it.
You can't hurt him. but he...
He can hurt me.
Yeah. I get that now.
This is something only I can do.
(gasps)
-PIKE: What's stopping you?
-Oh. I don't know.
You have to fight back. Marie.
(grunts)
(Pike groans. coughs)
♪ ♪
Happy anniversary.
-We made it.
Mm. bacon's burning. Hold on.
BATEL: Thought we said no gifts.
It's tradition.
Last year was paper.
second year is cotton.
M.B. and M.P.?
Well. I wasn't sure
if you were gonna take
the name. and... (sighs)
Well. planning the
wedding happened so fast.
we never talked about it. so
-got you both.
-(laughs) I see.
So there could be two
Captain Pikes or...
-two Captain Batels?
-(laughs)
Christopher Batel.
that's got a ring to it.
-It's nice.
-Mm.
-Hold on.
-Aw. come back to me.
What are you doing? (chuckles)
-Thought we said no gifts.
-It's tradition.
Sneak.
When you marry the
best chef in Starfleet.
-you want to show it off.
-(laughs)
I love it.
This is the life worth
risking everything for.
Mm.
(knock on door)
Who is it?
Oh. I think I know.
Bob? This early?
He's still trying to talk me
into training cadets
at the Academy.
Can you tell him no?
(knock on door)
You know I can't. I...
I have to do the things
I'm supposed to do.
And after our run-in
with the Vezda. I just...
I remember.
We made a promise to enjoy
however much time
we have together.
Yeah.
(knock on door)
-(dog barks)
-(gasps)
-(laughing)
-Oh. hey. what're you doing?
-Hey. wait. Hey. wait.
-(laughing)
(barking)
Down.
-Stay.
-(barks)
The Lucas?
It's a class-J training vessel.
How long?
PIKE: It's a three-month
observation exercise.
But you return a month early?
I do.
And when I come back. um...
(Juliet giggling)
-We knew this day would come.
-Yeah.
Just never realized how much
I'd actually have to live for.
And you'll continue
to live for it.
This life we have will change.
but it won't go away.
This is... this is
what we signed up for.
You faced the Vezda.
I can face this.
I-I'm not scared
of the accident.
I'm afraid of what it
will do to this family.
You always having to
take care of me...
Hey.
We have a beautiful life
because of you.
Because of us.
(knock on door)
Um... I think that's my ride.
At this hour? No.
It's too early.
(knock on door)
Chris?
How?
I don't know what happened.
I-I did everything exactly
as I was supposed to.
but the baffle plate.
it just never ruptured.
There was no radiation
leak. no explosion.
no accident.
You say that like
it's a bad thing.
I wasn't supposed to avoid this.
There could be
huge consequences.
-This was my destiny and...
-Maybe it's not anymore.
H-How can that be possible?
Skygowan.
When you were fighting
that thing inside Gamble.
I-I was there. but...
I never totally
understood what happened.
It was hard to explain.
The thought of losing you...
...of losing us. it-it gave me
the power I needed to open up
the fabric of space and time.
Maybe. some-somehow.
that reset everything.
I don't know. I don't
know if that's it.
but I know you're here now.
I don't know what
comes next anymore.
Isn't that the gift?
(knock on door)
Should we be concerned?
-(groans)
-(oven door closes)
Because Juliet's
coming to dinner?
Whew. (sighs)
No. I'm fairly used
to that by now.
With a guest? A month after
she started her new job?
Look.
The Daystrom Institute
is lucky to have her.
I'm just concerned. Chris.
What if something's gone wrong?
(knock on door)
-Then we face it. like we always do.
-(door opens)
-JULIET: We're here. Hi. Dad.
-Hey! Get in here.
-Hi.
-PIKE: Kid. What? Really?
-(laughs) Thank you.
-Mom. act surprised.
-About what?
-You didn't tell her?
-You told me not to say anything.
-Tell me about what?
Oh. my God. but. Dad.
you never listen to me.
-(clears throat)
-Elijah.
What are you doing here?
-(laughs)
-Hey. buddy. Welcome.
Eli. how's your father
doing these days?
Uh. he's good. ma'am.
Uh. Admiral April
sends his best.
Admiral April? Tell me he
doesn't make you call him that.
No. he does not. (laughs)
Um...
Uh...
(scoffs)
Eli. um. it's us.
You've been here
a million times.
Is everything okay?
Is something going on
with your job? Or his job?
Or e... someone's job?
No. Okay. everyone's job
is fine. My job is great.
All of the advice from
Uncle Sock really paid off.
You've known how to say "Spock"
since you were four years old.
Yes. and he loves his nickname.
-(laughs)
-Why rush home?
What's this surprise
supposed to be?
Well. we did tell Dad at
the Academy yesterday.
ELIJAH: But we wanted
to ask you as well.
Admiral. uh...
We're engaged.
ELIJAH: But only with
your blessings. ma'am.
(Elijah and Juliet laugh)
JULIET: I know
it's old-fashioned.
You have more than my blessing.
Have you told your father yet?
ELIJAH: Uh. not yet.
Well. we'll tell him together.
I never thought we'd see this.
And yet here we are.
(knock on door)
Oh. should I get that?
Get what?
(knock on door)
PIKE: You don't hear that?
Chris. come back to me.
-(knock on door)
-BATEL: Chris.
What?
Champagne. Go put some on ice.
-And some cider for you.
-Yeah. Cider for me. Okay.
BATEL: So much to
celebrate tonight.
(sighs)
BATEL: We did it.
We made it.
PIKE: Mm.
I never thought it was possible.
When I'm gone...
-Marie.
-I have to say it.
I won't really be gone.
I'll always be with you.
All you have to do is
look up at the stars...
...and know that I'm
waiting for you there.
It's a little early.
(sighs)
(knock on door)
Someone at the door. Chris.
I'm not leaving your side.
Chris. this lifetime was a gift.
But we both know it's time.
(stammers)
A gift?
(knock on door)
BATEL: Living our
lives like this.
we got lucky.
You've given me
everything I needed.
And more than I
could've hoped for.
I needed to have this first.
So I can say goodbye
and still remember you.
Still remember us.
Marie...
What are you talking about?
After all. isn't this
what we're fighting for?
What we've always
been fighting for?
(knock on door)
Answer the door. Chris.
♪ ♪
GAMBLE: Soon. they
will all be free.
and your memories
will be long gone.
(screeching)
You will stay.
It's too late to stop me.
I am filled with light
you cannot vanquish.
I am the Beholder.
But I am also Marie Batel.
The love I feel is brighter
than your darkness.
Your judgment is here.
♪ ♪
PIKE: Captain's personal
log. supplemental.
With the Vezda gone.
the people of Skygowan
are recovering.
As if waking up from
a terrible dream.
We remember. but it's over.
(sighs) It's a
perfect time to leave.
-Maybe get some time together.
-Mm.
It's actually also. um...
...a perfect time to stay.
Yeah.
The Vezda are imprisoned.
All their history.
all that knowledge
of the past. it's...
it's here for us to
study now. safely.
I can't walk away from that.
(clears throat)
CHAPEL: What's this?
A scan of something I found.
Maps of the stars.
Areas that we've never been in.
If I'm gonna stay on the planet.
someone's got to look into it.
(sighs) It's never gonna
be easy between us. is it?
Easy isn't interesting.
Checkmate.
Intriguing.
We have melded minds. and yet.
I see you are still far
better at this game than I.
And I see that you have some
interesting new relationships.
(La'An laughs)
Um. anyway. I'll see you...
You and I will remain friends.
I think so. Spock.
It is possible. someday. we
will work on the same ship.
Until then. it may be useful
for us to continue our game.
Despite your behavior
on the moon of Orion.
Although. I must
confess. it is of
extraordinary good fortune that
no one suffered permanent...
What are you boys talking about?
Oh. nothing at all.
James. good to see you.
Spock. are you ready?
Dance rehearsal.
Oh. God. the mind meld.
Like a steel trap.
("Wait" by M83 playing)
♪ Send ♪
-(sighs)
-♪ Your dreams ♪
♪ Where nobody hides ♪
Hey.
Want to talk?
Not yet.
♪ ♪
One day. maybe soon. but...
...not yet.
♪ Give ♪
♪ Your tears ♪
♪ To the tide ♪
♪ No time ♪
♪ ♪
PIKE: Even as a boy. I
always hated goodbyes.
♪ No time ♪
How can we love the people
in our lives so deeply...
...and then. one day.
simply never see them again?
♪ No time... ♪
Perhaps these moments we share
are anything but fleeting.
But...
maybe...
maybe they never really vanish.
Maybe Spock was right.
and time is not what we think.
♪ No time ♪
Maybe memory is as
real as the present...
♪ ♪
...and no one we have
ever loved is truly gone.
♪ No time. ♪
♪
(boatswain's whistle blows)
Captain on the bridge.
Dr. Korby's research on Skygowan
has revealed a large number
of uncharted planets.
How many?
Enough for a five-year mission.
ORTEGAS: I did just
happen to plot a course
to a promising M-Class planet.
If that sounds
cool to you. sir...
Hailing frequencies
open. Captain.
Yeah.
(sighs)
Is this a "hit it" situation?
Uh. it's a new future.
It's whatever kind of
adventure we want it to be.
I mean. I still kind
of like "hit it."
(laughs)
Why don't you take
us out. Erica.
As fast as you want to go.
♪ ♪
ORTEGAS: Okay.
you asked for it.
Captioning sponsored by CBS
Captioned by Media Access
Group at WGBH access.wgbh.org